## Esther's Reflection

Oh wow, what a class! It's very hard to say whether it was good or bad but either way I must say I'm glad I have gone through this experience. I learn a lot from it, not only from success but also from failure - and much more so from failure. It has been a very challenging experience and I (and we, but I guess I'm just talking about my own reflections here) failed many times in many ways, but at least I can say that I'm walking away from it knowing how I can become so much better in many, many ways. And well, that's what science is all about, right? (And also life honestly :') )

On the one hand, I think I have learned much more about building robots than I anticipated I would. I think "building" is a better word than "making" when it comes to robotics, because to me "making" can sound a bit more casual and allows some spontaneity along the way (like "making a cake" or "making music"), whereas "building" suggests a much more carefully planned process that you have to do block by block, and sometimes if you miss one step, things fall apart (figuratively, but also sometimes literally if your robot is built with legos). Actually, building a robot is quite the contrary to making a cake: with cake making, you start with a recipe and improvise along the way; with robot building, you start with nothing, prototype your way to something (I guess there's some room for spontaneity there), and then start over to build the whole thing step by step, until it's finally perfectly functional and robust (we didn't get there, but at least now I can rest/live in peace knowing that I know how we can get there). 

Unlike Roger and Tyler, I came into the class already having some experience working with robots and arduino; I had a passion for (and a lot of faith in, still) behavior-based robotics, I knew (or at least I thought/think I did/do) all about finite state machines and the subsumption hierarchy (which I thought was the answer to EVERYTHING but now I realize the world is a much bigger place)...I thought everything will be ok, we could come up with a game plan before spring break and we'll build it and ace this thing. I was so wrong. There was some major gap between theory and implementation that I was confronted with. In theory, we call it the reality gap. In implementation, the reality gap doesn't care what people call it. It's just...there. 

So, it turned out coming up with a game plan wasn't nearly the hardest part - not for this task, anyway. The hardest part (for our team, anyway) turned out to be how to make our robot see the world the way we want it to. We humans evolved to be able to have categorical perceptions of colors and objects, and we take it for granted; our eyes automatically adjust for light intensity, saturation, size, distance, all that fun stuff, without even knowing what they are. A robot doesn't just do that. Its sensors pick up raw values that reflect the physical properties of its world (with A LOT OF NOISE), and it's up to us to tell it how to interpret these raw data. And that is hard, because we didn't really know how to do it. We ended up using some rough criteria, adjusting them frequently, especially when there was a change in lighting in the environment; that was not very robust. There was also A LOT more uncertainty than we ever anticipated or (I think it's fair to say) were really equipped well enough to handle - who knew the lights in villard room were technically YELLOW? Who knew that there would be colored chairs that looked exactly like eggs to the robot? Who knew the colors looked so different before vs. after the lights warmed up? On the one hand our robot wasn't exactly evolvable (if it were this would be solved with some simple twitches, but our sensor mapping went very out of wack), on the other hand we as designers were not well prepared to deal with a rapidly changing world - we had our limits. Most of our time spent on the robot was assiduously adjusting the sensor reading criteria, and that was very draining and frustrating (BUT ROGER IS AMAZING AND HAS SO MUCH PATIENCE OMG). In hindsight I think this is one of the very hard problem that has to be solved by autonomous agents, and I'm excited to think/learning more about it.

Another thing that turned out very challenging but also therefore wildly interesting was how some small changes in manners of motor movements can lead to some BIG differences in its behavioral patterns, just by nature of how that affects how it interacts with the environment. At one point we made our robot go straight while cruising, and that gave us some problems - because our white line check wasn't perfect, it kept going out of the arena. We made it arc slightly leftward instead, and that DRASTICALLY reduced how many times it went across the edge. For another example, it turned out that how many degrees the robots turned when it turned around after detecting a white line affected the behavior pattern too, because that decided which way it was facing when it started again. I wish we had more time to explore that, but alas, such is life, and life goes on. There are many, many more things to explore - in the future! 

I'm also very glad that I learned A LOT about how to use arduino and electronics. Although I have worked with it in the past, it was really more like "watching people work with it and occasionally doing some sensor testing using code that people already wrote." I have had an immersive experience working with it this semester and learned so so so much more about it (and I have a lot of people to thank, especially Roger and Tyler - I really can't thank you enough and I'll say this again later). As someone who's NEVER taken a computer science class and honestly kind of stumbled my way into STEM, I have a lot of insecurities about coding, and Roger and Tyler are both SUPER AMAZING coders (who are also SUPER AMAZING PEOPLE) who gave me a lot of exposure, instructions as well as encouragement, and that was really great. Arduino is a VERY powerful tool, not just for robotics but for all sorts of things, and I feel empowered knowing how to use it because now I see so so so many opportunities and I feel ready to explore them.

On the other hand, I have also learned a lot about working with people - intra-team, inter-team, and beyond - in the context of STEM. I am a cognitive science and neuroscience double major, while my two teammates are computer science majors, and at least in the beginning of the semester we thought and talked about things VERY DIFFERENTLY; I talked about "the things robot do" as behaviors, they talked about them as functions; I saw the robot as an electrical animal, they saw it as a computer with sensors and motors. I had a hard time inhibiting myself from casually throw out cog sci jargons or "sharing these super cool concepts" and not shutting up about them, and I often had to bother them with "wait slow down so how does this code work exactly again??" which they patiently explained. I think we worked really well together, not because we could all understand each other and get on the same page on the first try - that did not happen at all, we had plenty of disagreements, even towards the end. We worked well because when we didn't agree, we listened, and explained - we communicated with each other, and at the end of the day we knew that we were all on the same team working towards the same goal. Another thing that was helpful was that as time went on, it became obvious that I was the hardware person, Roger was the sensor person and Tyler was the algorithm person, and we all knew what we each was responsible for, but nonetheless also had a lot of crosstalks because on the one hand these things all had to work together, on the other hand while there are some slight differences in the skillsets each of us came in with, we all started out knowing very little about what we were doing, and we were all learning and growing together, giving insightful suggestions or help on each other's "specialty". I think the similar pattern could be seen in other teams, too, and I think it reflects the kind of cross-disciplinary collaboration in the fields of STEM. It's just a good experience to have.

I do have to admit that I really, really wish that this whole competition was much more collaborative, even between teams, than it had been. While I believe that every individual person in the class is kind and collaborative (especially based on how many of they have helped me in one way or the other), I think the nature of this course being a "competition" kind of set a weird tone for how the teams should or shouldn't interact with each other, which became slowly and gradually more weird (to me anyway) - although we helped each other out occassionally, it felt like a taboo to discuss our strategy or to ask other people's strategy, or to comment on how other teams are doing; sometimes even offering help can come off as condesending, or "betraying your own group." I never felt completely comfortable with it, but I went along because it didn't occur to me there was something else I could've done. I just thought "this is how it works with these kinds of competitions" (and occassionally remembered why I really, really don't like competitions). We talked about our strategy amongst our team as if it's some super important secret (let's be honest, I think everyone knew what we were up to, so I'm not even sure why we did that, I guess we just liked to be dramatic because we thought it was funny but in a way it's also not), we threw looks at the one team who's ahead of everyone else, etc. etc. I didn't put my finger on it until after the competition, when we were disappointed, some other teams were disappointed, some team felt very hurt, and I just felt very wrong, so I spent a lot of time thinking what could've gone differently. I think the competitive environment was awkward overall, and got fairly toxic towards the end when everyone was under a lot of stress. This is just not the kind of environment I like and not the kind of STEM that I believe in. I came to the conclusion that I believe in helping each others out and growing together, NOT taking each others down or even just minding each person/team's own business. There is already a whole lot of inequality and injustice in the world, and when it comes to knowledge and technology - which are very powerful resources, and are not exactly limited like food or water or money - so there's all the more reasons to share, to help, to inspire, and to learn from each other, and to distribute these resouces as equally as possible. And I wanted the kind of collaborative, communicative experience between me and my teammates between everyone, for everyone. Why are we afraid of sharing anyway? If I could do it over, in an ideal world where everyone is on board with this, I would share all the progress we make in doing our robot. It's crystal clear to me that the basic things, like tips of how to get good sensors readings or map the world effectively, should be shared so everyone could move pass the frivolous (although interesting) tasks and have more time and energy to explore strategies. Say if other teams want to "copy" our strategy, they'll have to build it themselves anyway so it's not like they are free-riding, and I doubt it'll be the exact same thing - after all don't we "learn" from the open sources online anyway? We can just cite each other. If other teams design their strategy to counter our strategy, that just means we'll need to up our game, and it will make the competition more interesting and we will be stimulated to challenge ourselves - which is really the whole point of positive competition. Maybe my mental stimulation is a bit crude but at least it would be a step towards the better. STEM of all fields should be about bringing good to all of society and human kind, not just to some individual persons or groups (which actually probably encourages research misconduct and hinder scientific advances). Although I think it's unfortunate this class, especially towards the end, hasn't been the greatest experience for many of us, I'm glad that it made me realize what kind of world I rather want instead, and I hope I will be working towards that more consciously in the future.

Throughout this class A LOT of people, students and faculties alike, have inspired me and taught me one thing or another. Not all of them were robot-related, all of them left some sort of impression on my heart/brain/mind/embodied situated experience/dynamic nature, and I just want to say thank you and that I'm very grateful. I'm so grateful to be in the same group with Roger, who is one of the most resilient, vibrant, and thoughtful person I've every met, who also got MAD STYLE and has a big heart, is so friendly and caring and really good at bringing people together; and Tyler, who is stubborn and straight-forward much like myself, except more level-headed and has THE BEST PUNS; both of them are among the most hardworking, detail-oriented, brilliant, dedicated, thoughtful, communicative, collaborative, and creative people I know (gosh I wish I had a bigger vocabulary) and it's just such a great thing that people like them exist at all and it gives me hope in humanity. I'm sorry that we lost a lot of sleep for this class (I think if there were an award for "most hours spent in the robotics lab" we would've won it), and perhaps not all our dedication felt fruitful, but it was truly inspiring just how stubbornly dedicated we were (like, wow, it was pretty hardcore). Other than my amazing teammates I have also received some kind of help, instructions, or intellectually stimulating conversations from every other student in this class, which I honestly have never experienced in my other classes (no, not even seminars), and that's pretty amazing. Larry has helped our team with our fxxxups and showed me his incredible workshop and inspired me to become as good as I can with the "hardward stuff" and I know fourty years later I will still remember his lesson on stranded wires. I'm also much indebted to Josh, Nick, John and other members of the cog sci department beyond this course for their patient and effective guidance as well as generous sharing of resources in coding, hardward, arduino, robotics, doing good science, being a good person, and much more. Gosh I wish I could thank everyone but I think those are what's relevant to this course so I'll stop here. 

## Roger's Reflection

I came into the class having my only experience with robotics be making a Scribbler robot move in a square pattern. (left(), delay(1000), left(), delay(1000)…)  I quickly came to a realization that my knowledge was extremely limited. This was both very daunting and very exciting! I knew that this class would become the most time consuming course of my semester. Looking back, it was also the most rewarding class I took here yet. 

There were plenty of sleepless nights and stressful sessions in the lab. However, the knowledge I got out of the course was priceless. Each one of us brought something valuable to the table. That’s the one thing I loved best about our group. Our chemistry. Tyler and I both being computer science majors, were really grateful to have Esther bestow upon us her cognitive science knowledge and experience in behavior-based robotic programming. Tyler and I both came to the rescue for each other a few times when debugging code as well. (both times in the wee hours of the morning)

This was the first time I did a group project of such a grand scale. We may not have had the winning robot, but I’m really happy to have gotten closer with my two fellow Oviraptors.
I didn’t leave the class with a 3D printed trophy, but I did leave the class with two great friends.


## Tyler's Reflection

While I'm disappointed that we didn't pass the final milestones or win the competition, I'm extremely pleased with my group. Not because we got second place; that felt a bit undeserved, even if we were one of only 2 teams to transport more than 1 egg successfully. No, I'm proud of the growth that I made and that my group made. Going in, I knew _nothing_. Nothing! I was petrified on that first day when Roger and I fumbled around with motors and the Arduino trying to get something to move. I've come incredibly far as a result of this course. I learned about graded vs ballistic behavior from Esther, which was absolutely crucial to Ovi's movement in the last 4 milestones. It's been a pleasure writing all of these journal entries for the group (I realize I can be a bit informal -- I hope it was chill :wink:), because I get the opportunity to constantly look back and see how far we've come. 

This growth didn't come without a price (6 nights of lost sleep, the total loss of my sanity, etc.), but even knowing that, I wouldn't change a thing. I'm incredibly proud of my boundary search and egg tracking. The very first time that Ovi tracked an egg and stopped with the egg in perfect position, I was on cloud nine. _That's_ why I'm a computer science major. And that wasn't even the highlight of the course. I actually got the chance to branch out into the physical side a few times. When Esther's original wall mechanism didn't work out due to an issue with a gear, I was the one who recommended pushing the walls with dowels. Esther implemented it with Legos but I was incredibly proud to have a real impact on the physical design. I've learned and accomplished a whole lot as a result of this course (and made some incredible friends!!! I can't say how grateful I am for my team :heart:), and for that I am extremely grateful. 
